---
layout: post
title:  "Notes on installing i3 and what I learned about X window system"
date:   2015-02-06
categories: linux
---

# i3

I just installed i3 window manager on ubuntu. This post serves as memory of what I did and learned.

# Customizations

## remap caps lock

I want to remap caps lock to escape.
i3 does not load the keyboard settings from Unity, so I created the file ~/.Xmodmap with the lines
{% highlight bash %}
clear Lock
keysym Caps_Lock = Escape
{% endhighlight %}
and execute it on loading i3 by adding this to my ~/.i3/config:
exec xmodmap ~/.Xmodmap

## external monitor setup

I often work with an external monitor.
Standard I want to detect if an external monitor is connected I want to disable my laptop monitor and auto-config the external monitor.

Script /usr/local/bin/setup-xrandr
{% highlight bash %}
#!/bin/bash
if (xrandr | grep "VGA1 connected"); then
    xrandr --output LVDS1 --off --output VGA1 --auto
else
    if (xrandr | grep "HDMI1 connected"); then
        xrandr --output LVDS1 --off --output HDMI1 --auto
    else
        xrandr --output VGA1 --off --output HDMI1 --off --output LVDS1 --auto
    fi
fi
echo "setup-xrandr `date`" >> ~/.i3/log
{% endhighlight %}

Now I make a shorcut to execute setup-xrandr in .i3/config

```
bindsym $mod+Shift+X exec setup-xrandr
```

I tried to automatically execute it in ~/.i3/config by adding the line exec setup-xrandr - but that does execute at all.
The last line of the script is used for checking when the setup-xrandr script is executed.
Also, I want it to be loaded before when the display manager starts so I have a pretty login screen.
I add the setup-xrandr to /etc/lightdm/lightdm.conf under SeatDefaults:
display-setup-script=/usr/local/bin/setup-xrandr
Now the script is nicely executed when logging in, but the login screen is in low-res with mirrorred screens still.
I can live with this for now, but to be continued.

+ TODO executing setup-xrandr before the login screen is displayed. Add it to /etc/init/lightdm.conf ?
+ TODO why is the .i3/config command not executed but the xmodmap is?
+ TODO check out python-xrandr when switching to more complex dual monitor setup.

## Setting python calculator shortcut
I tend to use python as a calculator and I want to be able to bring it up quickly in a floating window as not to change my current window lay-out.
This does the trick (in my .i3/config).
{% highlight bash %}
bindsym $mod+Shift+P exec i3-sensible-terminal -e "ipython" --title="PYTHONCALC"
for_window [title="^PYTHONCALC$"] floating enable
{% endhighlight %}

Similar, I reserve Alt+Shift+T for a pop-up terminal.
{% highlight bash %}
bindsym $mod+Shift+T exec i3-sensible-terminal --title="TEMPTERM"
for_window [title="^TEMPTERM$"] floating enable
{% endhighlight %}

## Other shortcuts, commands to remember, and aliases

+ using i3lock: ```bindsym Control+$mod+l exec i3lock -d -c 000020```
+ suspending: ```alias susp='sudo pm-suspend && i3lock -c 000050'```
+ Added startup applications:
{% highlight bash %}
    exec --no-startup-id nm-applet
    exec --no-startup-id dropbox start -i
{% endhighlight %}
+ alsamixer for command line sound control.
+ amixer vs pulse audio can conflict, on muting for example.
+ nmcli for command line network management.

## i3bar
Does not let me monitor CPU and mem usage.
But since chrome is so memory hungry and I would be interested in a per-core load, I will look into py3status.

## other

+ I installed i3 from the sur5r repo: https://i3wm.org/docs/repositories.html
+ Of course I changed the navigation to vim style navigation with hjkl.
+ No edge borders please! ```hide_edge_borders both```
+ Hiding the title bar for chrome. I just want to have the tabs on top, nothing else. ```for_window [class="^Google-chrome$"] border 1pixel```
+ switched to uxterm (I used terminator before, and before that gnome-terminal). Basically terminator was just a substitute for a tiling window manager. ```sudo update-alternatives --config x-terminal-emulator```. Using solarized color scheme from https://github.com/solarized/xresources and set fonts using example from https://github.com/terryma/dotfiles/blob/master/.Xresources

# X window system
I never delved into this so this is just a summary of what I learned. Please let me know if you see errors.

+ X provides the basic framework for interacting with the display, mouse and keyboard.
+ X11 is the protocol standard.
+ Xorg is the free implementation, branched off from XFree86.
+ At boot time, you either get a virtual console terminal (like on a raspberry pi) or a display manager is loaded on the X server console (ctrl+alt+F7).
+ In ubuntu the default display manager is lightdm.
+ A display manager starts the X servers, user sessions and login screen (greeter).
+ lightdm is configured in /etc/lightdm/lightdm.conf with simple things like default window manager.
+ The display manager checks /usr/share/xsessions/ to see which window managers / xsessions it has availble.
+ (TODO read more) If a display manager (lightdm) is used, ~/.xinitrc is not read. ~/.xinitrc is just used by startx. So to add logging for i3, I should probably edit the .desktop file in /usr/share/xsessions/
